Double strand breaks are a specific type of DNA damage.
A piece of DNA is broken on both strands of the double helix.
A double strand break is detected by various proteins
leading to p53 causing the cell cycle to pause.
If the damage is extensive, genomic instability has occurred. and the cell will die by apoptosis.
Conversely, if the damage is not extensive, the DNA can be repaired through various
mechanisms such as non-homologous end joining and homologous recombination.
Homologous recombination utilizes BRCA1 and BRCA2 in the repair process.
With a successful repair, the DNA is no longer broken, and the cell cycle resumes.
If the repair is not successful, p53 can induce apoptosis of the cell.
In some cases, failed repairs can go unnoticed, the mutation is integrated into the genome,
and this can lead to cancer development.